
What is cloud computing?
    Its an on-demand delivery of IT resources over the internet with pay-as-you-go pricing.

Types of cloud computing
    Infrastructure as a Service(IAAS):
        Provide compute, storage and network services.
        eg: aws ec2, Google Compute Engine(GCE).

    Platform as a Service(PAAS):
        eg: aws lambda, aws elastic beanstalk

    Software as a Service(SAAS):
        eg: Slack, dropbox etc.


cloud computing deployment models:
    Public cloud: AWS, GCP, Azure
    Private cloud: on premise or 3rd party hosted not shared with other customers. FBI, Fed.
    Hybrid cloud: combination of both public and private. Banks(data is not sent from country to country but website can be seen from other countires)


AWS Global Infrastructure:
    Regions: physical region around the world.
    Availability zones: group of 1 or more data centers across the region.

    AWS has 25 regions, which have 81 Availability zones.

Compute:
    ec2 instances(vms in cloud).
    ec2 features: amazon linux, ubuntu, windows, redhat, centos.
    Various types are present like general purpose, compute optimized, memory optimized, storage optimized.
    AMI(Amazon Machine Image) contains software config(os, application server etc) from which you can launch an instance.

    AWS EC2 & EKS: container mgmt services for running docker on ec2.
    AWS lambda: serverless compute for stateless code execution in response to triggers.
    On demand: Pay for compute by second with no long term commitments.
    Reserved instance: make 1 -3 year contracts and get discount.
    Spot instance: spare amzon ec2 instances with savings upto 90% off on demand prices.
    cheapest option is spot instances(can be shutdown/interrupted) and reserved instances(uninterrupted).

    EC2 naming:
        c5g.xlarge:
            c = compute optimied, m = memory optimized.
            5 = 5th generation.
            q = graviton, additional capability
            xlarge = 4 vCPUs and 8 GB memory.

    Ec2 security groups:
        Its acts as virtual firewall for EC2.
        Enable traffic based on protocol and port numbers.
        by default, allows all outbound traffic.
        security groups are stateful

45 min.




