
PING: packet internet groper
Its tests the reachability of the host on a IP network.
ping measures the round trip time from origin to destination that are echoed back to the source.
ping operates by sending ICMP(Internet Control Message Protocol) echo requests to the target and waiting for ICMP echo reply.
For IPv6, ping6 is used.
> ping -c 5 www.facebook.com

Ping tests the layer 3 connectivity. TTL value for ping is 255 and reduces by 1 every time when reaches router.

This command replies with packet transmitted, received, packet loss, round trip min, max, avg, stddev values.

ping to host name and ip address:
> ping www.google.com # This is a hostname(server name), So first request goes to dns server of this server to get the ip address of www.google.com, then pinged to ip address.
This is slower.
> ping 8.8.8.8 This is a google public DNS server. domain name is not required to be resolved. This is faster.

ping functionality:

host1 .1<- 1.1.1->.2 RTA .1<-2.2.2 -> .2host2
mac 1               mac2 mac3                mac4

If host1 want to ping host2
step1: host1 has source ip as its ip, source mac as mac1. destination ip as 2.2.2.2 and dont know about destination mac.
step2: host1 broadcasts ip with FF mac address. RTA will unicast with mac2 as mac address. ARP in RTA resolves destination mac based on destination ip.
Step3: host1 sends  icmp echo request.
Step4:Now RTA will replace destination mac from mac2 to mac4 and forwards the request.

Similar happens at host2 and send the icmp echo reply to host1.


ICMP: Internet Control Message Protocol. Its an error reporting protocol.
When there is an problem in the network, network devices like routers will generate and send this message to senders to inform about it.



TRACEROUTE:
> traceroute www.facebook.com

For ipv6 packets, command: traceroute6 www.facebook.com
In windows, tracert sends ICMP packets. But traceroute send UDP packets.
The path that packets take from source to destination.
traceroute uses TTL(Time To Live) field in ip header. TTL prevents routing loops.

Functionality of TTL:
Generally, TTL value at source by default is 64. At each hop, when it passes the router, its value is decremented by 1.
When its values reaches 0, the router drops the packet and sends the message to source with its ip address.

Traceroute uses this functionality of TTL. It first sends ICMP packet is sent with TTL as 1.
Then router drops it and sends the ICMP response to source with its ip address.
Then second packet is sent with TTL as 2.The router forwards it to another router by reducing value to 1.
Other router reduces to 0 and drops the packet and ICMP Time exceeded response with its ip address is sent back for UDP packets.
same procedure happens until it reaches the server. For server ICMP destination unreachable message is sent back for UDP packets.

1 Problem: Sometimes some routers does not send ICMP response with ip address. Also, if next routers send, this router will not forward ICMP responses. Then traceroute is the problem.
Also some firewalls filter ICMP messaes.

traceroute is used to test the delay and route between 2 end points.


IFCONFIG: It explains about the network interfaces on a machine.
It shows the ipv4 and ipv6 ip addresses that are present on an interface. examples are en0, en1 on mac machine.
loopback ip address(127.0.0.1)(localhost) is always present even when there is no internet.
It is mainly used for debugging purpose.
Ifconfig explains: 1) Type of interface(Ethernet), 2) mac address, 3) ip address 4) broadcast address
5) subnet mask 6) MTU(Maximum Transmission Unit) is the size of packet received by ethernet card. By default it is 1500.
> ifconfig eth0 192.168.1.5 netmask 255.255.255.0 up
> route add default gw 192.168.1.1 eth0 (default gateway command.)
> route -n (To display the routes on different networks.)

> ifconfig eth0 inet6 add 2001::1/64